team_name: TU Wien, dwh GmbH, DEXHELPP
model_name: Austrian Agent-Based COVID-19 Model
model_abbr: AustrianCoVABM
model_contributors: Martin Bicher <martin.bicher@tuwien.ac.at>, Claire Rippinger <claire.rippinger@dwh.at>, Dominik Brunmeir <dominik.brunmeir@dwh.at>, Christoph Urach <christoph.urach@dwh.at>, Melanie Zechmeister <melanie.zechmeister@dwh.at>, Niki Popper <nikolas.popper@tuwien.ac.at>
website_url: https://www.dwh.at/en/projects/covid-19/
license: model results are cc-by-4.0, source code not licensed and not public
team_model_designation: primary
methods: time-continuous agent-based epidemics model supported by three meta-models: vaccination model, immunity waning model, hospitalization model.
team_funding: model development and regular forecasts were and still are funded by various research funding agencies (FFG, WWTF, SMDM), the Austrian Ministry of Health and the Gesundheit Österreich GmbH
twitter_handles: niki_popper
data_inputs: inputs to the models(s) include strain dependent disease parameter values (infectiousness, durations, seasonality,...), vaccine dependent vaccination properties (manufacturer, shot number, prerequisites), immunization parameter values (base effectiveness and waning distribution per immunization event (recovery from specific variant, vaccine) and target (infection from specific variant, hospitalization, ICU hospitalization), test-system related parameter values (detection rate per age), demographic parameter values (regional, age and sex structure), and contact specific parameters (POLYMOD contact data, data for specifying the dispersion of the network, data for households, workplaces, schools, as well as OD-matrices for mobility, and tourism data to model the import of new variants). Additionally, the model uses vaccination data and vaccination forecasts. The model furthermore applies a timeline with modelled policies (e.g. school closure, contact tracing, ...) and certain dynamic parameter-value-changes (e.g. detection rate, hospitalization rate). The model uses one free time-dependent factor multiplied to the transmissibility to calibrate the model to past incident cases per age and federal-state. The process is similar for hospitalizations in the corresponding meta-model (see below).
methods_long: The overall process involves the use of four sequential models: First, a vaccination model develops a feasible vaccine forecast, second, an agent-based epidemics model (ABM) generates a forecast for the case numbers, third, an immunity waning model estimates the overall protection level of the population against hospitalization based in the results of the ABM, and finally, a hospitalization model creates a forecast for the hospital and ICU occupancy based on the results of the ABM and the waning-model.  The time-continuous (event-based) ABM is the most important part of this chain and uses contact locations (households, workplaces, schools) to spread the virus. Infections cause the person to pass on copy of the virus type object. Thereafter, a corresponding disease pathway is started for the infected agent which may include a testing-event which renders the case to be confirmed in the reporting system. Recovery from the infection may cause the agent to become immune for a sampled period – immunity is evaluated separately against all modelled strains. Immunity loss dates are drawn from a Weibull distribution. New variants are introduced via random infections from tourists. NPIs are partially modelled directly (e.g. closure of schools, tracing, …) and partially modelled via reduction of contact numbers or transmissibility (e.g. face mask wearing). Vaccinations are imported from external files and treated similarly to recovery events. The vaccination file is either taken directly from the official reporting system or, in case of a forecast, generated via a vaccination model that considers information about ordered vaccine doses, vaccination infrastructure, and assumptions about willingness. The outcomes of the ABM are afterwards reevaluated for immunization against (ICU) hospitalization using an individual based immunity-waning model. The results of the waning-model and the ABM are then passed on to a hospitalization model (stock-flow type).  For a full specification of the ABM, we refer to https://www.dwh.at/en/projects/covid-19/Covid19_Model_20210111.pdf. Information to the hospitalization model is found under https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214767v3. Documentations for the other meta-models are currently work in progress.
model detais:
modeling_NPI: NPIs are partially modelled directly (e.g. closure of schools, tracing, …) and partially modelled via reduction of contact numbers or transmissibility (e.g. face mask wearing)
compliance_NPI: Adherence values are not modelled directly but calibrated
contact_tracing:  A certain percentage of agent-agent contacts within the last days are traced and isolated for a certain timespan. Parameter values vary with time and are in accordance with the official guidelines. K1-contact testing is implemented but was never activated in the calibrated parametrization.
testing: dependent on an age-dependent detection rate, infections become confirmed with a certain time-delay
vaccine_efficacy_transmission: Immunity is modelled as vector of boolean states. Each vector entry represents, whether the agent is immune against infection with the regarded virus strain. After an immunization event (i.e. vaccination and recovery), two random numbers decide about, whether (a) immunity is gained at all and (b) how long immunity lasts. Hereby, a parameter matrix is used containing assumptions for each immunization cause (vaccine, recovery from certain variant) against infection from each virus variant.
vaccine_efficacy_delay: 14 days since first dose
vaccine_hesitancy: Regarded in a meta-model which generates the vaccine-forecast.
vaccine_immunity_duration: Varies and depends on the shot number and the target virus-strain. Usually, a Weibull distribution is used to sample the immunity loss date, which is fitted to published effectiveness data.
natural_immunity_duration: Varies and depends on the virus-strain the agent recovered from and the target virus-strain. Usually, a Weibull distribution is used to sample the immunity loss date, which is fitted to published effectiveness data.
case_fatality_rate: Varies with the variant. Mechanism implemented, but not up to date since it is hardly used.
infection_fatality_rate: Varies with the variant. Mechanism implemented, but not up to date since it is hardly used.
asymptomatics: Asymptomatic cases are not specifically regarded, since the terminology is too vague. We distinguish only between detected and undetected cases.
age_groups: one-year groups
importations: scale with the reported/extrapolated number of overnight-stays per month and region.
confidence_interval_method: Monte-Carlo simulation is used to quantify the uncertainty of the stochastic model mechanisms. Rarely used.
calibration: The model uses one free time-dependent factor multiplied to the transmissibility to calibrate the model to past incident cases per age and federal-state. The sequentially used hospitalization model fits the hospitalization/ICU rates and length of stays to the last 100 daily observation points of the occupancy.
spatial_structure: one model agent is used for every inhabitant of the country. Each of them has a static latitude/longitude

